SQL Server Management Studio (SSMS) is the principal tool for administering the Database Engine and writing Transact-SQL code. 
It's hosted in the Visual Studio shell. SSMS is available as a free download. The latest version can be used with older versions of the Database Engine.

SQL Server Configuration Manager installs with both SQL Server and the client tools.
It lets you enable server protocols, configure protocol options such as TCP ports, configure server services to start automatically, 
and configure client computers to connect in your preferred manner. 
This tool configures the more advanced connectivity elements but doesn't enable features.


To determine the name of the instance of the Database Engine
Log into Windows as a member of the Administrators group, and open Management Studio.
In the Connect to Server dialog box, select Cancel.
If Registered Servers isn't displayed, on the View menu, select Registered Servers.
With Database Engine selected on the Registered Servers toolbar, expand Database Engine, right-click Local Server Groups, point to Tasks,
and then select Register Local Servers. Expand Local Server Groups to see all the instances of the Database Engine installed on the computer displayed. 
The default instance is unnamed and is shown as the computer name. A named instance displays as the computer name followed by a backward slash (\) and
then the name of the instance. 
For SQL Server Express, the instance is named <computer_name>\sqlexpress unless the name was changed during setup.


To verify that the Database Engine is running
In Registered Servers, if the name of your instance of SQL Server has a green dot with a white arrow next to the name,
the Database Engine is running and no further action is necessary.
If the name of your instance of SQL Server has a red dot with a white square next to the name, the Database Engine is stopped. 
Right-click the name of the Database Engine, select Service Control, and then select Start.
After a confirmation dialog box, the Database Engine should start and the circle should turn green with a white arrow.


To connect to the Database Engine
1.At least one administrator account was selected when SQL Server was being installed. Perform the following step while logged into Windows as an administrator.
In Management Studio, on the File menu, select Connect Object Explorer.
2.The Connect to Server dialog box opens. The Server type box displays the type of component that was last used.
3.Select Database Engine.
In the Server name box, type the name of the instance of the Database Engine. 
For the default instance of SQL Server, the server name is the computer name.
For a named instance of SQL Server, the server name is the <computer_name>\<instance_name>, such as ACCTG_SRVR\SQLEXPRESS. 
4.Select Connect.
